GH-43631: [C][Format] Add ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler interface (#43632)
apache/arrow: docs/source/format/CDeviceDataInterface.rst

    *Mandatory.* Handler to be called when an error is encountered by the producer. After calling
    this, the ``release`` callback will be called as the last call on this struct. The parameters
    are an ``errno``-compatible error code and an optional error message and metadata.

    If the message and metadata are not ``NULL``, their lifetime is only valid during the scope
    of this call. A consumer who wants to maintain these values past the return of this function
    *MUST* copy the values themselves.

    If the metadata parameter is not ``NULL``, to provide key-value error metadata, then it should
    be encoded identically to the way that metadata is encoded in :c:member:`ArrowSchema.metadata`.

.. c:member:: void (*ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.release)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler*)

    *Mandatory.* A pointer to a consumer-provided release callback for the handler.

.. c:member:: void* ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.private_data

    *Optional.* An opaque pointer to consumer-provided private data.

    Producers *MUST NOT* process this member. Lifetime of this member is handled by
    the consumer, and especially by the release callback.

> Result lifetimes

Reviewer: Should add a section about error handling as well? Errors can flow in both directions here, which is a bit more complex that the regular C stream interface.

Author: added a section on error handling

''''''''''''''''

The ``ArrowSchema`` and ``ArrowDeviceArray`` that are passed to the ``on_schema`` and
``on_next`` callbacks must be released independently. Their lifetimes are not tied to
the ``ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler`` or the handler functions.

The ``const char*`` error ``message`` and ``metadata`` which are passed to ``on_error``
are only valid within the scope of the ``on_error`` function itself. They must be copied
if it is necessary for them to exist after it returns.

Stream Handler Lifetime
'''''''''''''''''''''''

Lifetime of the async stream handler is managed using a release callback with similar
usage as in :ref:`C data interface <c-data-interface-released>`.

Thread safety
'''''''''''''

All handler functions should only be called in a serialized manner, but are not guaranteed
to be called from the same thread every time. A producer should wait for handler callbacks to

> return before calling the next handler callback. As a result, a consumer can manage back-pressure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
return before calling the next handler callback, and before calling the `release` callback.
As a result, a consumer can manage back-pressure
```

> simply by sleeping or otherwise waiting to return from the ``on_next`` handler if necessary.

Reviewer: Do we really want to encourage consumers to handle backpressure by sleeping? This forces the producer to invoke consumer callbacks from a dedicated thread, adding complexity and overhead.

> 

Reviewer: Yet another subsection may be useful, to give guidance about serialization between the initial `ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler` handoff (when the consumer passes the struct to the producer) and the first callback invocations (probably `on_schema` or `on_error`). Is the producer allowed to call `on_schema` as soon as the consumer passes the `ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler` to it (which makes things harder for the client)? Or must the producer defer callback invocation after that (which is probably easier for the client, but perhaps harder for the producer)?

@westonpace Thoughts?

Author: add a clarification sentence regarding this.

Reviewer 2: By "as soon as" do you mean "during the call?"  In other words, if there is a...

```
dataset.scan(handler);
```

Then is your question "can the producer call the callback functions before `scan` returns"?

I'd personally be ok either way (I don't think it's too much burden on the consumer to have `handler` ready before the call starts) but agree it would be good to clarify which it is.

Or is your question something different (e.g. should there be a `set_handler` and a `start_producing` method?)

    *Mandatory.* Handler for receiving the schema of the stream. All records should
    match the provided schema. If successful, the function should return 0, otherwise
    it should return an ``errno``-compatible error code.

    The ``const char*`` parameter exists for producers to provide any extra contextual information
    they want, such as the total number of rows in the stream, statistics, or otherwise. This is
    encoded in the same format as :c:member:`ArrowSchema.metadata`. If not ``NULL``,
    the lifetime is only the scope of the call to this function. A consumer who wants to maintain
    the additional metadata beyond the lifetime of this call *MUST* copy the value themselves.

    Unless the ``on_error`` handler is called, this will always get called exactly once and will be
    the first method called on this object. As such the producer *MUST* provide an ``ArrowAsyncProducer``
    object when calling this function to allow the consumer to manage back-pressure and flow control.
    The producer maintains ownership of the ``ArrowAsyncProducer`` and must clean it up before or after

>     calling the release callback on this object.

Reviewer: Before or after? We should perhaps be authoritative here. After sounds safer.

    A producer that receives a non-zero result here must not subsequently call anything other than
    the release callback on this object.

> .. c:member:: int (*ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_next_task)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler*, struct ArrowAsyncTask*, const char*)

Reviewer: Why is it called a "task"? It's an array, so perhaps `on_next_array`.

Author: Because we are passing an `ArrowAsyncTask` not passing an array directly for the reasons documented. It would be inaccurate to call it `on_next_array` but I'm open to other names.

    *Mandatory.* Handler to be called when a new record is available for processing. The
    schema for each record should be the same as the schema that ``on_schema`` was called with.
    If successfully handled, the function should return 0, otherwise it should return an
    ``errno``-compatible error code.

    Rather than passing the record itself it receives an ``ArrowAsyncTask`` instead to facilitate

>     better consumer-focused thread control as far as receiving the data. A call to this function

Reviewer: Why does it facilitate enough in that regard? This only seems to complicate things: the data is available already, why not give it already to the consumer?

Reviewer: Ok, I've read the explanation below.

    simply indicates that data is available via the provided task.

    The ``const char*`` parameter exists for producers to provide any extra contextual information
    they want. This is encoded in the same format as :c:member:`ArrowSchema.metadata`. If not ``NULL``,
    the lifetime is only the scope of the call to this function. A consumer who wants to maintain
    the additional metadata beyond the lifetime of this call *MUST* copy the value themselves.

>     A producer *MUST NOT* call this concurrently from multiple different threads.

Reviewer: Presumably it cannot be called concurrently from multiple identical threads
```suggestion
    A producer *MUST NOT* call this concurrently from multiple threads.
```

    *MUST* copy the values themselves.

    If the metadata parameter is not ``NULL``, to provide key-value error metadata, then it should
    be encoded identically to the way that metadata is encoded in :c:member:`ArrowSchema.metadata`.

    It is valid for this to be called by a producer with or without a preceding call to
    :c:member:`ArrowAsyncProducer.request`. This callback *MUST NOT* call any methods of an
    ``ArrowAsyncProducer`` object.

.. c:member:: void (*ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.release)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler*)

    *Mandatory.* A pointer to a consumer-provided release callback for the handler.

    It is valid for this to be called by a producer with or without a preceding call to
    :c:member:`ArrowAsyncProducer.request`. This must not call any methods of an ``ArrowAsyncProducer``
    object.

.. c:member:: void* ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.private_data

    *Optional.* An opaque pointer to consumer-provided private data.

    Producers *MUST NOT* process this member. Lifetime of this member is handled by
    the consumer, and especially by the release callback.

> 

Reviewer: Also, how does a producer signal that the stream has ended? Shouldn't there be a dedicated callback on `ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler`?

Author: A producer signals this by calling `on_next_task` with a `NULL` pointer for the `ArrowArrayTask`.

```
  // Handler for receiving data. This is called when data is available providing an
  // ArrowAsyncTask struct to signify it. The producer indicates the end of the stream
  // by passing NULL as the value for the task rather than a valid pointer to a task.
```

I'll add that to the rst file, looks like i missed it.

The ArrowAsyncTask structure
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The purpose of using a Task object rather than passing the array directly to the ``on_next``
callback is to allow for more complex and efficient thread handling. Utilizing a Task
object allows for a producer to separate the "decoding" logic from the I/O, enabling a

> consumer to avoid transferring data between CPU cores (e.g. from one L1/L2 cache to another).

Reviewer: Hmm, in real life the producer can have its own threads as well, since it's probably supposed to handle multiple in-flight consumer requests. Why would decoding be offloaded to consumer threads? This introduces a layer of complexity that will be difficult to make efficient.

Author: It's not required to offload the decoding to consumer threads, it's just a possible idea to reduce the cost of transferring data between CPU threads / improve cache handling as per the comment. (See @westonpace's comments for more info about the origin of this idea). For simplicity, most cases will likely perform the decoding on the producer side and then have `get_data` be nearly instantaneous to just return the data directly. 

This aspect merely makes it viable for use cases that require this complexity for efficiency to still be able to use this interface.

Reviewer: But the consumer has zero knowledge whether it would be beneficial to offload `get_data` to separate threads, while the producer does. Why would this responsibility fall on the consumer?

Author: It's to allow a potential efficiency. This is adapted and based on the discussion that started [here](https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/43632#issuecomment-2284669419) with @westonpace's comment.

But rather than the exact workflow that was proposed there I've adapted it to the following:

* Consumer calls `request` on the `ArrowAsyncProducer`
  * Producer schedules IO
  * When IO completes and data is available, Producer creates task to decode/decompress the data and calls `on_next_task` to hand it to the consumer
* Once consumer has a free thread it assigns it the task. Consumer runs task, decodes data (the decode logic is producer logic), and then processes the decoded data (consumer logic) all without a CPU core transfer (data stays in L2 cache).

In this way, the consumer determines when it has a free thread to process the data, it just potentially runs the producer logic to perform a decode/decompress before it processes the data. If this efficiency of managing the processor caches isn't necessary then the producer task could just return the data without any additional work if desired.

Reviewer: As an existing real-world example, if the producer is reading from an IPC file, for each new RecordBatch it is able to decompress its buffers on multiple threads, which is good for latency.

Author: As long as this function is still not blocking on IO for the consumer, and the logic is managed by the producer, I don't see that as being an issue here. We're not dealing with multiple processes here as this is a C ABI, not a cross process interface, so ultimately it's just a matter of who is managing the thread pool. 

In the example you've provided, one of two things could happen:

1. The producer could decide that there's no benefit to the consumer to offload the decompression and simply perform that decompression itself before it calls `on_next_task`, so `get_data` is just handing off the `ArrowDeviceArray` object.
2. The producer decides there is benefit to allowing the consumer to determine *when* the decompression happens and bakes this logic into the `get_data` callback. The consumer chooses when to call `get_data` (a synchronous function call) which then utilizes the producer logic to perform the decompression (possibly across multiple producer threads if really desired) and then receives the final result.

In both cases, it allows for reduced pressure on the L2/L1 caches for handing the data off and the producer is making the decision as to whether or not there is benefit to offloading the logic. 

The documentation explicitly states that `get_data` is only allowed to be called **exactly once** on a given `ArrowAsyncTask` so there isn't any concern of calling it on a single task from multiple threads.

@lidavidm @westonpace @bkietz do any of you have any thoughts on this discussion? As this is a core aspect of the current design I'd like to get this hammered out before I officially send this to the mailing list for a vote (in case I need to explicitly change the design as a result of this discussion).

Reviewer: You didn't answer my objection. In the IPC reader with buffer compression example, the producer could be able to leverage parallelism _for a single task_. But that's only if it manages threads by itself.

Reviewer 2: If the producer wants to do the decompression then it can do so.  The "task" that gets delivered in this case is just a thin wrapper around the decoded data and doesn't do any work.

If the producer wants to leave decompression for the consumer then it can do so.  The "task" that gets delivered in this case actually does decompression.

Reviewer 3: I think task structure is useful but we're not highlighting the real sweet spot for this flexibility. The reason not to do I/O and decoding on the same thread is that frequently we have separate thread pools for each, and we don't want to block for IO on a work thread nor do we want to do anything in an IO thread other than queue IO as immediately as we can. Any consumer who has distinct thread pools like this might be annoyed by a producer which insists on doing CPU bound work in a thread pool the consumer can't control. Tasks enable the producer to defer CPU bound work to the consumer

```suggestion
Using a Task object rather than simply passing the array directly to an ``on_next``
callback enables consumers to keep separate I/O and CPU work thread pools.
For example, a producer might construct Task objects after I/O is complete but
leave decoding logic until ``get_data`` is called. A consumer who knows this can
avoid blocking I/O threads by transferring Tasks to the CPU work thread pool.
After ``get_data`` completes the data will be processed immediately on the same
CPU work thread, avoiding transfer between CPU cores.
```

IIUC, Antoine's case of fanning out decoding is behavior that would most benefit a simpler consumer which has only one thread. That's also a useful case to support; what's the story for how a consumer would pass `use_threads=True` to a producer? Is that out of scope for this protocol, part of the factory interface which accepts a `ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler*`?

Reviewer 2: Note: all answers obviously biased by my current designs.

> The reason not to do I/O and decoding on the same thread is that frequently we have separate thread pools for each, and we don't want to block for IO on a work thread nor do we want to do anything in an IO thread other than queue IO as immediately as we can.

That is my goal.  In my current design the I/O thread pool belongs to the producer and the CPU thread pool belongs to the consumer.  Hence the need for the task interface.

> what's the story for how a consumer would pass use_threads=True to a producer?

What does this mean?  No I/O threads or no CPU threads?

Re I/O threads:

This is something negotiated outside the protocol.

Re CPU threads:

For the latter, in the "producer does not decode" case then the producer is not using CPU threads and so it's a non-issue.

In the "producer does decode" case then this would be something negotiated outside the protocol (e.g. as part of the call that starts producing).

In my current design the producer is created with a filesystem which has a "preferred parallelism" which is what controls the number of I/O threads.  The consumer controls the number of CPU threads by choosing how many tasks to run in parallel.

> Is that out of scope for this protocol

IMO, yes.

Reviewer 2: I will admit there is one wrinkle I'm still ironing out :)

Decompression often happens at different scale than the consumers batch size.  For example, there might be 100K values per compression block but consumers might want to operate on batches of 32K.

This can force a thread transfer since three decode tasks share the same compression task and only one thread can do the work.  Still, this is something I would handle entirely in the consumer in my case (e.g. two CPU thread pools, one for decompression and one for decoding).

> a simpler consumer which has only one thread. That's also a useful case to support;

Simple cases are maybe more easily handled by the synchronous interface?

Reviewer: > That is my goal. In my current design the I/O thread pool belongs to the producer and the CPU thread pool belongs to the consumer. Hence the need for the task interface.

If that's the goal for the spec then it should be clearly spelled out IMHO. _However_, it means that `get_data` probably shouldn't use any parallelism because of potential oversubscription. This should also be spelled out: `get_data` is a purely CPU, single-thread blocking task.

> If the producer wants to do the decompression then it can do so. The "task" that gets delivered in this case is just a thin wrapper around the decoded data and doesn't do any work.

That's a good point.

Reviewer 2: > If that's the goal for the spec then it should be clearly spelled out IMHO. However, it means that get_data probably shouldn't use any parallelism because of potential oversubscription. This should also be spelled out: get_data is a purely CPU, single-thread blocking task.

It's a _possible_ goal but not _the_ goal.  For example, all my discussion so far has been "scanner is producer, query engine is consumer".  However, I think the "query engine is producer, analytics script is consumer" is a completely valid use case as well.  In the latter use case there is no separation of I/O and CPU to worry about, if both those thread pools exist then they both exist on the producer and I would full expect the tasks returned by the producer in this case to be shallow batch wrappers.

I agree that `get_data` should be a purely CPU single-threaded blocking task.

Author: It seems that we've got somewhat of a consensus here and I'll update the comments and docs accordingly as far as `get_data` being a purely CPU, single-threaded blocking task.

I'm fine with renaming it `extract_data` if others agree with @bkietz's suggestion. Thoughts?

Author: @pitrou any further comments here? Did we reach a consensus?

This producer-provided structure has the following fields:

> .. c:member:: int (*ArrowArrayTask.get_data)(struct ArrowArrayTask*, struct ArrowDeviceArray*)

Reviewer: This is a blocking call while the rest of this API is non-blocking? This seems unexpected.

Author: Any and all I/O blocking should have been handled before the producer called the `on_next_task` callback, this function should not perform any I/O and should be as cheap as possible.

Reviewer: If it's as cheap as possible, then the whole argument about offloading to consumer threads does not stand, does it?

Author: It's as cheap as possible but it is allowed to leave a potential decoding / decompressing step for this method as long as the method is not io-blocking. This allows offloading a decoding/decompressing step to the consumer threads if desired

Reviewer: Again, the consumer does not know if there's anything beneficial to offload. Why not let the producer decide?

Author: The producer *is* deciding. The producer is what populates the `get_data` callback. If there's nothing beneficial to offload, then the function just returns the data directly. If there *is* something beneficial to offload then that logic is encapsulated in the `get_data` function. This pattern just allows the producer to make that decision.

  *Mandatory.* A callback to populate the provided ``ArrowDeviceArray`` with the available data.
  The order of ArrowAsyncTasks provided by the producer enables a consumer to know the order of
  the data to process.

  If a non-zero value is returned from this, it should be followed only by the producer calling
  the ``on_error`` callback of the ``ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler``. Because calling this method
  is likely to be separate from the current control flow, returning a non-zero value to signal
  an error occuring allows the current thread to decide handle the case accordingly, while still
  allowing all error logging and handling to be centralized in the
  :c:member:`ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_error` callback.

  Rather than having a separate release callback, any required cleanup should be performed as part
  of the invocation of this callback, with ownership of the Array being passed to the consumer-provided

>   parameter calling this, and must be released separately.

Reviewer: What must be released separately? This is difficult to parse, can you split this sentence in two?

Author: Clarified and split

  It is only valid to call this method exactly once.

.. c:member:: void* ArrowArrayTask.private_data

>   *Optional.* An opaque pointer to consumer-provided private data.

Reviewer: Why would a consumer put their own private data in a provider-supplied struct? This seems weird.

Author: that's a typo, i'll fix that

  Consumers *MUST NOT* process this member. Lifetime of this member is handled by
  the producer who created this object, and should be cleaned up if necessary during
  the call to :c:member:`ArrowArrayTask.get_data`.

The ArrowAsyncProducer structure
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

This producer-provided and managed object has the following fields:

> .. c:member:: void (*ArrowAsyncProducer.request)(struct ArrowAsyncProducer*, uint64_t)

Reviewer: Please let's make it `int64_t`, not `uint64_t`.

Author: any particular reason? The purpose of using `uint64_t` here was so that implementers don't need to manually validate that the value is > 0

Reviewer: For consistency with our usual conventions. Also because AFAIU Java doesn't have unsigned integers.

Reviewer 4: That's mostly false, as has been stated before; modern Java may not have an explicit unsigned type but has methods to manipulate integers as if they were unsigned.

Reviewer: Of course it's possible to do so (at worse you can write the required code by hand), but it's more tedious than using existing facilities around signed integers, e.g. https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/ValueLayout.html#field-summary

Reviewer: Overall the point still stands:
1) there is no real advantage in using an unsigned integer
2) it breaks our conventions and will make the codebase more error-prone
3) it can make things slightly harder for Java developers

so let's please switch to `int64_t`.

Author: The most convincing argument to me here is that it breaks the conventions, so i'll switch it to `int64_t` and update the docs that it should error if n < 0

  *Mandatory.* This function must be called by a consumer to start receiving calls to
  :c:member:`ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_next_task`. It *MUST* be valid to call
  this synchronously from within :c:member:`ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_next_task`
  or :c:member:`ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_schema`. As a result, this function
  *MUST NOT* synchronously call ``on_next_task`` or ``on_error`` to avoid recursive

>   and reentrant callbacks.

Reviewer: Wait, the opposite is said above above about `on_next_task`:
```restructuredtext
    This function *MUST* be able to be called re-entrantly on the same thread to allow for the
    :c:member:`ArrowAsyncProducer.request` callback to potentially call this method recursively.
```

Author: Looks like I missed a spot when I updated these, I'll fix that

  After ``cancel`` is called, additional calls to this function must be a NOP, but allowed.

  While not cancelled, calling this function registers the given number of additional
  arrays/batches to be produced by the producer. A producer should only call
  the appropriate ``on_next_task`` callback up to a maximum of the total sum of calls to

>   this method before propagating back-pressure / waiting.

Reviewer: Why does this talk about "propagating back-pressure"? If a consumer requests N arrays, it should receive N arrays.

Author: because of the disconnect between the consumer, the producer and whatever the *source* of the data is.

For instance, if the data is coming from a stream on the producer's side then just because the consumer requests N arrays, doesn't mean the producer won't receive >N arrays from the data source. Thus, back-pressure potentially needs to be handled by the producer to push back on the data source. This may be as simple as the producer *only* retrieving N arrays from its source, or it might be more complex. I didn't want to proscribe a sleep or any other particular way of handling the back-pressure.

Does that make more sense?

Reviewer: Ah, I see.

  Any error encountered by calling request must be propagated by calling the ``on_error``
  callback of the ``ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler``.

>   A producer *MUST* support an unbounded number of calls to this callback and *MUST* support

Reviewer: This is a very strange requirement. Why unbounded?

Author: It simplifies validation and checking for the consumer, again this is for compatibility with Reactive Streams. It ensures that a consumer should *always* be able to call it.

Reviewer: Consumers will have to handle errors anyway, why would this simplify anything?

Author: I'm fine with removing this requirement, at a worst case it can be added back without an ABI change if desired.

>   a total registered demand (sum requested - sum delivered) of up to ``UINT64_MAX``.

Reviewer: Uh, what? A producer can't place a smaller upper limit? Why is that?

Author: for compatibility with the Reactive Streams protocols and implementation. It also simplifies validation and error checking. Obviously if the demand is higher than the number of arrays in the stream, the consumer would eventually just receive notice that the stream is over (by receiving a NULL for the `ArrowAsyncTask` in the `on_next_task` callback)

Reviewer: I don't know what "Reactive Streams", but why would it proscribe any implementation-specific limit? This sounds like a silly thing to put in a spec, IMHO.

.. c:member:: void (*ArrowAsyncProducer.cancel)(struct ArrowAsyncProducer*)

  *Mandatory.* This function signals to the producer that it must *eventually* stop calling
  ``on_next_task``. Calls to ``cancel`` must be idempotent and thread-safe. After calling
  it once, subsequent calls *MUST* be a NOP.

  It is not required that calling ``cancel`` affect the producer *immediately*, only that it
  must eventually stop calling ``on_next_task`` and then subsequently call ``release``
  on the async handler object. As such, a consumer *MUST* be prepared to receive one or more
  calls to ``on_next_task`` or ``on_error`` even after calling ``cancel`` if there are still
  requested arrays pending.

  Successful cancelling *MUST NOT* result in a producer calling
  :c:member:`ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_error`, instead it should finish out any remaining
  tasks (calling ``on_next_task`` accordingly) and eventually just call ``release``.

  Any error encountered during handling a call to cancel must be reported via the ``on_error``

>   callback on the async stream handler.

Reviewer: Perhaps add that `cancel` is not allowed to call any consumer-side handlers other than `on_error`?

  that constructed this object.

Error Handling
''''''''''''''

Unlike the regular C Stream interface, the Async interface allows for errors to flow in
both directions. As a result, error handling can be slightly more complex. Thus this spec
designates the following rules:

* If the producer encounters an error during processing, it should call the ``on_error``
callback, and then call ``release`` after it returns.

* If ``on_schema`` or ``on_next_task`` returns a non-zero integer value, the producer *should not*
call the ``on_error`` callback, but instead should eventually call ``release`` at some point
before or after any logging or processing of the error code.

Result lifetimes
''''''''''''''''

The ``ArrowSchema`` passed to the ``on_schema`` callback must be released independantly,
with the object itself needing to be moved to a consumer owned ``ArrowSchema`` object. The
``ArrowSchema*`` passed as a parameter to the callback *MUST NOT* be stored and kept.

The ``ArrowAsyncTask`` object provided to ``on_next_task`` is owned by the producer and
will be cleaned up during the invocation of calling ``get_data`` on it. If the consumer

> doesn't care about the data, it should pass ``NULL`` instead of a valid ``ArrowDeviceArray*``.

Reviewer: This NULL special case should be documenting in `get_data` above instead?

Author: Added the documentation of this

The ``const char*`` error ``message`` and ``metadata`` which are passed to ``on_error``
are only valid within the scope of the ``on_error`` function itself. They must be copied
if it is necessary for them to exist after it returns.

Stream Handler Lifetime
'''''''''''''''''''''''

Lifetime of the async stream handler is managed using a release callback with similar
usage as in :ref:`C data interface <c-data-interface-released>`.

ArrowAsyncProducer Lifetime
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The lifetime of the ``ArrowAsyncProducer`` passed to ``on_schema`` is owned by the producer
itself and should be managed by it. It *MUST* remain valid at least until just before
calling ``release`` on the stream handler object.

Thread safety
'''''''''''''

> All handler functions should only be called in a serialized manner, but are not guaranteed

Reviewer: You mean consumer-side handler functions, or methods in `ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler`? Let's be extra explicit.

Author: fixed

to be called from the same thread every time. A producer should wait for handler callbacks to

> return before calling the next handler callback, and before calling the ``release`` callback.

Reviewer: But the `on_next_task` doc above says it should be reentrant.

Author: Fixed it with the previous updates. The `on_next_task` doc no longer says it should be reentrant.

> As a result, back-pressure is managed by how long it takes for the ``on_next`` handler to return.

Reviewer: There's no `on_next` handler. Furthermore, I would expect backpressure to be managed by when `get_data` on the "task" is called.

The ``ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler`` object should be able to handle callbacks as soon as
it is passed to the producer, any initialization should be performed before it is provided.

Possible Sequence Diagram
-------------------------

> .. mermaid::

Reviewer: Is there an easy way to see a rendered version of this? :-)

Author: You can use https://mermaid.live/edit to see a rendered version. You can also follow [this link](https://mermaid.live/edit#pako:eNqdU01vwjAM_StRToXR_oAeKqFx2GXaJHashExiICJNunxsQ4j_PqddKRsbh_nktM_Pzy_OkQsrkZfc42tEI3ChYOugqQ2juLfGxwZdXlV3z87KKNCVbO6cfZ_7gxELfFMCl8EhNA9gpEY37SsHdJ5KB5qSWbPyYocNZCPJAJ3OeuZlB5hOriT8puDcp3JpAB8yQ4V9aQuuT1Joa1sWWxYsMyyoBv3476fgb3oNfoRVAL-_kPxCx0FgCjSyP5AHbGMdQxA7lopGzHmQPyZJnMUWw0pCgKwoii_-jrtP1-Tznj21QVkDWh9-Ia-q_LZNAuiSdXZN3hnUWu_VWiNzdAXKKLMde_zboYsmo44qHzluLlS6WY3gMZvwGSc8CZO0sMfEWPNAy4I1LymVuIGoQ81rcyIoxGCXxMnL4CLOeGzJ2WG_h48oVbDusX8D3VM4fQI_2wk4) which should already have the diagram in it to view :)

call ``get_next`` from several threads should ensure those calls are
serialized.

Async Device Stream Interface
=============================

> The :ref:`C stream interface <_c-device-stream-interface>` provides a synchronous

Reviewer 5: The underscore is used in the anchor but not in the ref
```suggestion
The :ref:`C stream interface <c-device-stream-interface>` provides a synchronous
```

> API centered around the consumer calling the callback functions to retrieve

Reviewer 6: Are these really "call-back" functions? I know the spec and code calls them callbacks, but "producer functions" will be less confusing here.

```suggestion
API centered around the consumer calling the producer functions to retrieve
```

      void (*on_error)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler* self,
                       int code, const char* message, const char* metadata);

      // release callback
      void (*release)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler* self);

      // opaque handler-specific data
      void* private_data;
    };

    #endif  // ARROW_C_ASYNC_STREAM_INTERFACE

.. note::
    The canonical guard ``ARROW_C_ASYNC_STREAM_INTERFACE`` is meant to avoid
    duplicate definitions if two projects copy the C async stream interface
    definitions into their own headers, and a third-party project includes
    from these two projects. It is therefore important that this guard is kept
    exactly as-is when these definitions are copied.

The ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler structure
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The structure has the following fields:

.. c:member:: int (*ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_schema)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler*, struct ArrowAsyncProducer*, struct ArrowSchema*, const char*)

    *Mandatory.* Handler for receiving the schema of the stream. All records should
    match the provided schema. If successful, the function should return 0, otherwise

>     it should return an ``errno``-compatible error code.

Author: We don't do that above in any of the previous mentions of errno, so I don't feel like we need to do so. At worst, we should make the first mention of `errno` do this elsewhere in the spec as opposed to as part of this change.

    calling the release callback on this object.

    A producer that receives a non-zero result here must not subsequently call anything other than
    the release callback on this object.

.. c:member:: int (*ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_next_task)(struct ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler*, struct ArrowAsyncTask*, const char*)

    *Mandatory.* Handler to be called when a new record is available for processing. The
    schema for each record should be the same as the schema that ``on_schema`` was called with.
    If successfully handled, the function should return 0, otherwise it should return an
    ``errno``-compatible error code.

    Rather than passing the record itself it receives an ``ArrowAsyncTask`` instead to facilitate
    better consumer-focused thread control as far as receiving the data. A call to this function
    simply indicates that data is available via the provided task.

    The producer signals the end of the stream by passing ``NULL`` for the ``ArrowAsyncTask``
    pointer instead of a valid address. This task object is only valid during the lifetime of
    this function call. If the consumer wants to use the task beyond the scope of this method, it

>     must copy or move its contents to a new ArrowAsyncTask object.

Author: @bkietz suggested renaming it to `extract_data` over [here](https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/43632#discussion_r1766895138) do you have a preference for `extract_data` vs `consume_data`?

>     must copy or move its contents to a new ArrowAsyncTask object.

Reviewer 6: `extract_data` works as well and has the nice "decompression" connotation. But what does @bkietz think about `consume_data`?

>     must copy or move its contents to a new ArrowAsyncTask object.

Reviewer 3: `consume_data` sounds like a function to which data is passed rather than a function from which data is returned

>     must copy or move its contents to a new ArrowAsyncTask object.

Author: `extract_data` it is then! :)

    Producers *MUST NOT* process this member. Lifetime of this member is handled by
    the consumer, and especially by the release callback.

The ArrowAsyncTask structure
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The purpose of using a Task object rather than passing the array directly to the ``on_next``
callback is to allow for more complex and efficient thread handling. Utilizing a Task
object allows for a producer to separate the "decoding" logic from the I/O, enabling a
consumer to avoid transferring data between CPU cores (e.g. from one L1/L2 cache to another).

This producer-provided structure has the following fields:

.. c:member:: int (*ArrowArrayTask.get_data)(struct ArrowArrayTask*, struct ArrowDeviceArray*)

  *Mandatory.* A callback to populate the provided ``ArrowDeviceArray`` with the available data.
  The order of ArrowAsyncTasks provided by the producer enables a consumer to know the order of
  the data to process. If the consumer does not care about the data that is owned by this task,
  it must still call ``get_data`` so that the producer can perform any required cleanup. ``NULL``
  should be passed as the device array pointer to indicate that the consumer doesn't want the

>   actual data, letting the task perform necessary cleanup.

Reviewer 6: Oh, it's not a pure function. Yet another reason to call this `consume_data` instead of `get_data`.

  If a non-zero value is returned from this, it should be followed only by the producer calling

>   the ``on_error`` callback of the ``ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler``. Because calling this method

Reviewer 6: This assumes the error returned here can only originate from the process that produced the task (i.e. the producer). Consuming the data in the task is forced to be infallible.

Author: not quite. The function that retrieves the data from the task is called *by the consumer* and returns an `errno`-compatible int to indicate whether there was any issue with providing that data to the consumer from the task. 

As such, the consumer can propagate that error if they receive it, but getting more context and information about the error for logging beyond the errno value is still centralized to the `on_error` callback. As such, this does not force anything to be infallible.

Reviewer 6: >  If a non-zero value is returned from this, it should be followed only by the producer calling
>  the ``on_error`` callback

Is the producer then required to keep track of errors produced by the returned tasks?

Author: alternately, the producer can keep a reference to the `ArrowAsyncStreamHandler` in the `private_data` of the task, so it can easily call `on_error` without having to keep track of the errors produced

  is likely to be separate from the current control flow, returning a non-zero value to signal
  an error occuring allows the current thread to decide handle the case accordingly, while still
  allowing all error logging and handling to be centralized in the
  :c:member:`ArrowAsyncDeviceStreamHandler.on_error` callback.

  Rather than having a separate release callback, any required cleanup should be performed as part
  of the invocation of this callback. Ownership of the Array is given to the pointer passed in as

>   a parameter, and this array must be released separately.

Reviewer 6: Ok. Now this must definitely be renamed to `consume_data` as I suspected earlier.

>   It is only valid to call this method exactly once.

Reviewer 6: `consume_data` it is.

.. c:member:: void* ArrowArrayTask.private_data

  *Optional.* An opaque pointer to producer-provided private data.

>   Consumers *MUST NOT* process this member. Lifetime of this member is handled by
>   the producer who created this object, and should be cleaned up if necessary during
>   the call to :c:member:`ArrowArrayTask.get_data`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  Consumers *MUST NOT* process this member. Lifetime of this member is initiated by
  the producer when creating this object, and cleanup occurs during
  the call to :c:member:`ArrowArrayTask.consume_data`.
```

  tasks (calling ``on_next_task`` accordingly) and eventually just call ``release``.

  Any error encountered during handling a call to cancel must be reported via the ``on_error``
  callback on the async stream handler.

.. c:member:: void* ArrowAsyncProducer.private_data

  *Optional.* An opaque pointer to producer-provided specific data.

  Consumers *MUST NOT* process this member, the lifetime is owned by the producer
  that constructed this object.

Error Handling
''''''''''''''

Unlike the regular C Stream interface, the Async interface allows for errors to flow in
both directions. As a result, error handling can be slightly more complex. Thus this spec
designates the following rules:

* If the producer encounters an error during processing, it should call the ``on_error``
callback, and then call ``release`` after it returns.

* If ``on_schema`` or ``on_next_task`` returns a non-zero integer value, the producer *should not*
call the ``on_error`` callback, but instead should eventually call ``release`` at some point
before or after any logging or processing of the error code.

Result lifetimes
''''''''''''''''

> The ``ArrowSchema`` passed to the ``on_schema`` callback must be released independantly,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The ``ArrowSchema`` passed to the ``on_schema`` callback must be released independently,
```

call ``get_next`` from several threads should ensure those calls are
serialized.

Async Device Stream Interface
=============================

.. warning::

>     Experimental: The Aync C Device Stream interface is experimental in its current

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    Experimental: The Async C Device Stream interface is experimental in its current
```
